docs/loss_functions.md, before:

# Loss Functions Documentation

Loss functions are a crucial component of neural networks. They measure how well the model's predictions match the true target values. The output of a loss function is a single scalar value, often referred to as the "loss" or "error," which quantifies the discrepancy. During training, the goal of the optimization algorithm (like Stochastic Gradient Descent) is to adjust the network's parameters (weights and biases) to minimize this loss.

## Base Class: `Loss`

The `Loss` class serves as an abstract base for all loss functions. It defines the common interface that all specific loss functions must implement.

### Class Definition

```python
class Loss:
    def loss(self, y_true, y_pred):
        raise NotImplementedError

    def prime(self, y_true, y_pred):
        raise NotImplementedError
```

### Methods

#### `loss(self, y_true, y_pred)`

*   **Purpose:** Calculates the value of the loss function.
*   **Parameters:**
    *   `y_true`: The ground-truth target values (e.g., the actual digit labels).
    *   `y_pred`: The predicted values from the neural network.
*   **Returns:** A scalar value representing the calculated loss for a batch of data.

#### `prime(self, y_true, y_pred)`

*   **Purpose:** Calculates the derivative (gradient) of the loss function with respect to the predicted values (`y_pred`).
*   **Returns:** An array of the same shape as `y_pred`, representing the gradient of the loss.
*   **Description:** This is the starting point for the backpropagation algorithm. It tells the final layer of the network how much it needs to change its output to reduce the loss.

---

## Specific Loss Functions

### `MeanSquaredError` (MSE)

The `MeanSquaredError` (MSE) loss function is primarily used for **regression problems**, where the goal is to predict a continuous value (e.g., the price of a house). It quantifies the average squared difference between the predicted and true values.

#### Mathematical Explanation

*   **Forward Pass (Loss Calculation):**
    The formula for MSE is:
    $ L = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} (y_{pred,i} - y_{true,i})^2 $
    Where $N$ is the number of samples. The errors are squared to ensure that positive and negative errors contribute equally and to penalize larger errors more heavily.

*   **Backward Pass (Derivative of Loss):**
    The derivative of the MSE loss with respect to the predicted values is:
    $ \frac{\partial L}{\partial y_{pred}} = \frac{2}{N} (y_{pred} - y_{true}) $

---

### `CategoricalCrossEntropy`

The `CategoricalCrossEntropy` loss function is the standard choice for **multi-class classification problems**, such as our MNIST digit recognition task. It is designed to work with a `Softmax` activation function on the output layer.

#### Core Concept: Cross-Entropy

Cross-entropy measures the difference between two probability distributions. In our case, these are:
1.  The **true distribution**: The one-hot encoded label (e.g., for the digit '2', the distribution is `[0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]`).
2.  The **predicted distribution**: The output of the `Softmax` layer (e.g., `[0.05, 0.1, 0.7, 0.05, ...]`)

The loss is low when the predicted distribution is very similar to the true distribution (i.e., a high probability for the correct class).

#### Mathematical Explanation

*   **Forward Pass (Loss Calculation):**
    The formula for Categorical Cross-Entropy is:
    $ L = -\frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} \sum_{c=1}^{C} y_{true,ic} \log(y_{pred,ic}) $
    Where $N$ is the number of samples and $C$ is the number of classes. Since `y_true` is one-hot encoded, this simplifies to just taking the negative log of the predicted probability for the single correct class.

*   **Backward Pass (Derivative of Loss):**
    The derivative of the Categorical Cross-Entropy loss with respect to the predicted probabilities (`y_pred`) is:
    $ \frac{\partial L}{\partial y_{pred}} = -\frac{1}{N} \frac{y_{true}}{y_{pred}} $
    **Important Note:** When this loss is used immediately after a `Softmax` activation function, the combined derivative (of `Softmax` and `CategoricalCrossEntropy`) simplifies to the very elegant and stable form:
    $ \frac{\partial L}{\partial \text{input to Softmax}} = y_{pred} - y_{true} $
    This simplification is a key reason why these two are almost always used together in classification tasks.

```

Commit message:

docs: Create comprehensive documentation suite
- Add a main documentation README to act as a table of contents.
- Add Concepts.md to explain fundamental ML/NN terms for beginners.
- Add Layers_Explained.md to detail the math and code for each layer.
- Enhance existing documentation files with more detail and cross-references.

docs/loss_functions.md, after:

# Loss Functions Documentation

Loss functions are a crucial component of neural networks. They measure how well the model's predictions match the true target values. The output of a loss function is a single scalar value, often referred to as the "loss" or "error," which quantifies the discrepancy. Loss functions are a crucial component of neural networks, quantifying the discrepancy between the network's predictions and the true target values. During training, the goal of the optimization algorithm is to minimize this loss.

(See [Fundamental Concepts](./Concepts.md) for an introduction to Loss Functions, Training, and Optimization.)

## Base Class: `Loss`

The `Loss` class serves as an abstract base for all loss functions. It defines the common interface that all specific loss functions must implement.

### Class Definition

```python
class Loss:
    def loss(self, y_true, y_pred):
        raise NotImplementedError

    def prime(self, y_true, y_pred):
        raise NotImplementedError
```

### Methods

#### `loss(self, y_true, y_pred)`

*   **Purpose:** Calculates the value of the loss function.
*   **Parameters:**
    *   `y_true`: The ground-truth target values (e.g., the actual digit labels).
    *   `y_pred`: The predicted values from the neural network.
*   **Returns:** A scalar value representing the calculated loss for a batch of data.

#### `prime(self, y_true, y_pred)`

*   **Purpose:** Calculates the derivative (gradient) of the loss function with respect to the predicted values (`y_pred`).
*   **Returns:** An array of the same shape as `y_pred`, representing the gradient of the loss.
*   **Description:** This is the starting point for the backpropagation algorithm. It tells the final layer of the network how much it needs to change its output to reduce the loss.

---

## Specific Loss Functions

### `MeanSquaredError` (MSE)

The `MeanSquaredError` (MSE) loss function is primarily used for **regression problems**, where the goal is to predict a continuous value (e.g., the price of a house). It quantifies the average squared difference between the predicted and true values.

#### Mathematical Explanation

*   **Forward Pass (Loss Calculation):**
    The formula for MSE is:
    $ L = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} (y_{pred,i} - y_{true,i})^2 $
    Where $N$ is the number of samples. The errors are squared to ensure that positive and negative errors contribute equally and to penalize larger errors more heavily.

*   **Backward Pass (Derivative of Loss):**
    The derivative of the MSE loss with respect to the predicted values is:
    $ \frac{\partial L}{\partial y_{pred}} = \frac{2}{N} (y_{pred} - y_{true}) $

---

### `CategoricalCrossEntropy`

The `CategoricalCrossEntropy` loss function is the standard choice for **multi-class classification problems**, such as our MNIST digit recognition task. It is designed to work with a `Softmax` activation function on the output layer.

#### Core Concept: Cross-Entropy

Cross-entropy measures the difference between two probability distributions. In our case, these are:
1.  The **true distribution**: The one-hot encoded label (e.g., for the digit '2', the distribution is `[0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]`).
2.  The **predicted distribution**: The output of the `Softmax` layer (e.g., `[0.05, 0.1, 0.7, 0.05, ...]`)

The loss is low when the predicted distribution is very similar to the true distribution (i.e., a high probability for the correct class).

#### Mathematical Explanation

*   **Forward Pass (Loss Calculation):**
    The formula for Categorical Cross-Entropy is:
    $ L = -\frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} \sum_{c=1}^{C} y_{true,ic} \log(y_{pred,ic}) $
    Where $N$ is the number of samples and $C$ is the number of classes. Since `y_true` is one-hot encoded, this simplifies to just taking the negative log of the predicted probability for the single correct class.

*   **Backward Pass (Derivative of Loss):**
    The derivative of the Categorical Cross-Entropy loss with respect to the predicted probabilities (`y_pred`) is:
    $ \frac{\partial L}{\partial y_{pred}} = -\frac{1}{N} \frac{y_{true}}{y_{pred}} $
    **Important Note:** When this loss is used immediately after a `Softmax` activation function, the combined derivative (of `Softmax` and `CategoricalCrossEntropy`) simplifies to the very elegant and stable form:
    $ \frac{\partial L}{\partial \text{input to Softmax}} = y_{pred} - y_{true} $
    This simplification is a key reason why these two are almost always used together in classification tasks.

```
