docs/train_cnn.md, before:

# Training a CNN on MNIST

This document explains the `train_mnist.py` script, which serves as the main entry point for building, training, and evaluating our from-scratch Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) on the MNIST dataset.

(For a detailed breakdown of each layer, see [The Layers Explained](./Layers_Explained.md). For an introduction to the core concepts, see [Fundamental Concepts](./Concepts.md).)

## The `train_mnist.py` Script

*   **Purpose:** To bring together all the implemented components (layers, loss functions, network) to create and train a functional CNN for handwritten digit recognition.
*   **Workflow:**
    1.  **Data Loading:** Loads the preprocessed MNIST data using the `preprocess_mnist_data` function. For faster development and testing, the script is initially configured to use a smaller subset of the data (1000 training samples, 200 test samples).
    2.  **Model Definition:** A CNN model is constructed by adding a sequence of layers to a `Network` object.
    3.  **Compilation:** The network is compiled with the `CategoricalCrossEntropy` loss function, which is the standard for multi-class classification.
    4.  **Training:** The `network.train()` method is called to train the model on the training data for a specified number of epochs and with a given learning rate.
    5.  **Evaluation:** After training, the script iterates through the test set, makes predictions for each image, and compares the predicted class with the true class to calculate the final accuracy.

## CNN Architecture (LeNet-5 Style)

The architecture is inspired by the classic LeNet-5 model, which is highly effective for digit recognition.

1.  **Input:** `(28, 28, 1)` - Grayscale images of handwritten digits.

2.  **Layer 1: Convolutional -> ReLU -> MaxPooling**
    *   `Convolutional(input_shape=(28, 28, 1), num_filters=6, kernel_size=(5, 5), padding='same')`: Applies 6 different 5x5 filters to the input image. `'same'` padding is used to ensure the output feature maps have the same spatial dimensions (28x28) as the input.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   `MaxPooling(pool_size=(2, 2), stride=(2, 2))`: Downsamples the 28x28 feature maps to 14x14, reducing dimensionality and providing translational invariance.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(14, 14, 6)`

3.  **Layer 2: Convolutional -> ReLU -> MaxPooling**
    *   `Convolutional(input_shape=(14, 14, 6), num_filters=16, kernel_size=(5, 5), padding='valid')`: Applies 16 different 5x5 filters to the feature maps from the previous layer. `'valid'` padding means no padding is applied.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   `MaxPooling(pool_size=(2, 2), stride=(2, 2))`: Downsamples the 10x10 feature maps to 5x5.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(5, 5, 16)`

4.  **Layer 3: Flatten**
    *   `Flatten()`: Converts the 3D feature maps `(5, 5, 16)` into a 1D vector.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(400,)` (since 5 * 5 * 16 = 400)

5.  **Layer 4: Dense -> ReLU**
    *   `Dense(400, 120)`: A fully connected layer that maps the 400 features to 120 features.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(120,)`

6.  **Layer 5: Dense -> ReLU**
    *   `Dense(120, 84)`: Another fully connected layer, reducing the features from 120 to 84.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(84,)`

7.  **Layer 6: Output Layer (Dense -> Softmax)**
    *   `Dense(84, 10)`: The final fully connected layer, which produces 10 output values (one for each digit class).
    *   `Softmax()`: Converts the 10 raw output values into a probability distribution, where each value represents the predicted probability for a digit from 0 to 9.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(10,)`

## How to Run

To run the entire training and evaluation process, execute the following command from your project's root directory:

```bash
python train_mnist.py
```

The script will print the training loss for each epoch and, upon completion, will display the final test accuracy.

## Key Concepts in this Script

*   **Convolutional Layer:** The core building block of a CNN. It uses a set of learnable filters (or kernels) to detect features like edges, corners, and textures in an image.
*   **ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit):** A simple yet powerful activation function that introduces non-linearity by outputting the input directly if it is positive, and zero otherwise. This helps the network learn more complex patterns.
*   **MaxPooling Layer:** A down-sampling technique that reduces the spatial dimensions of the feature maps. It works by taking the maximum value over a window of the input, which helps to make the learned features more robust to small translations in the input image.
*   **Flatten Layer:** A utility layer that reshapes a multi-dimensional tensor into a 1D vector. This is a necessary step to transition from the convolutional/pooling layers to the fully connected dense layers.
*   **Dense Layer:** A standard fully connected neural network layer where each input neuron is connected to each output neuron. These layers are typically used in the final stages of a CNN to perform classification based on the features extracted by the convolutional layers.
*   **Softmax Layer:** An activation function used in the output layer for multi-class classification. It converts the raw output scores (logits) from the final dense layer into a probability distribution over the classes, where all probabilities sum to 1.
*   **Categorical Cross-Entropy Loss:** The loss function used for multi-class classification. It measures the difference between the predicted probability distribution (from the Softmax layer) and the true distribution (the one-hot encoded label).

## Training Progress: Loss Plot

Below is a plot illustrating the training loss over epochs. A decreasing trend indicates that the network is learning and its predictions are becoming more accurate over time.

![Training Loss Plot](./images/training_loss.png)

## Checkpointing (Pausing and Resuming Training)

For long training runs, it's crucial to be able to save the model's progress and resume training later. Our `Network` class supports this through checkpointing:

*   **Saving Checkpoints:** During training, after each epoch, the model's current weights and biases are saved to a `.npz` file in the `models/checkpoints/` directory. Each checkpoint file is named to include the epoch number (e.g., `model_epoch_1.npz`).
*   **Resuming Training:** If `resume_from_checkpoint` is set to `True` in the `train` method, the network will automatically look for the latest checkpoint file in the specified `checkpoint_dir`. If found, it loads the parameters from that checkpoint and continues training from the next epoch.

This allows you to interrupt training (e.g., if your computer shuts down or you need to use it for something else) and pick up exactly where you left off, saving valuable training time.

## GPU Usage (CPU-Only Implementation)

It's important to note that this "CNN from Scratch" implementation, built using pure NumPy, runs exclusively on the **CPU (Central Processing Unit)**.

*   **Why CPU-Only?** The primary goal of this project is to understand the fundamental mathematics and algorithms of neural networks by implementing them from scratch. NumPy provides the necessary array manipulation capabilities for this educational purpose.
*   **GPU Acceleration:** Modern deep learning frameworks (like PyTorch, TensorFlow, JAX) achieve significant speedups by leveraging **GPUs (Graphics Processing Units)**. GPUs are highly parallel processors optimized for the matrix multiplications and other numerical computations common in neural networks.
*   **How GPUs Work (Briefly):** To utilize a GPU, the numerical operations would need to be offloaded to a GPU-accelerated library (e.g., NVIDIA's CuPy, which provides a NumPy-like interface for GPUs) or a full deep learning framework. This involves managing memory on the GPU and using GPU-specific kernels for computations.
*   **Implication for this Project:** While our implementation is functional and educational, it will be considerably slower than a GPU-accelerated version, especially for larger datasets or more complex models. This is an inherent trade-off when building from first principles with CPU-bound libraries.

Commit message:

DOCS: Add explanations for training hyperparameters and parameter initialization

docs/train_cnn.md, after:

# Training a CNN on MNIST

This document explains the `train_mnist.py` script, which serves as the main entry point for building, training, and evaluating our from-scratch Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) on the MNIST dataset.

(For a detailed breakdown of each layer, see [The Layers Explained](./Layers_Explained.md). For an introduction to the core concepts, see [Fundamental Concepts](./Concepts.md).)

## The `train_mnist.py` Script

*   **Purpose:** To bring together all the implemented components (layers, loss functions, network) to create and train a functional CNN for handwritten digit recognition.
*   **Workflow:**
    1.  **Data Loading:** Loads the preprocessed MNIST data using the `preprocess_mnist_data` function. For faster development and testing, the script is initially configured to use a smaller subset of the data (1000 training samples, 200 test samples).
    2.  **Model Definition:** A CNN model is constructed by adding a sequence of layers to a `Network` object.
    3.  **Compilation:** The network is compiled with the `CategoricalCrossEntropy` loss function, which is the standard for multi-class classification.
    4.  **Training:** The `network.train()` method is called to train the model on the training data for a specified number of epochs and with a given learning rate.
    5.  **Evaluation:** After training, the script iterates through the test set, makes predictions for each image, and compares the predicted class with the true class to calculate the final accuracy.

## CNN Architecture (LeNet-5 Style)

The architecture is inspired by the classic LeNet-5 model, which is highly effective for digit recognition.

1.  **Input:** `(28, 28, 1)` - Grayscale images of handwritten digits.

2.  **Layer 1: Convolutional -> ReLU -> MaxPooling**
    *   `Convolutional(input_shape=(28, 28, 1), num_filters=6, kernel_size=(5, 5), padding='same')`: Applies 6 different 5x5 filters to the input image. `'same'` padding is used to ensure the output feature maps have the same spatial dimensions (28x28) as the input.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   `MaxPooling(pool_size=(2, 2), stride=(2, 2))`: Downsamples the 28x28 feature maps to 14x14, reducing dimensionality and providing translational invariance.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(14, 14, 6)`

3.  **Layer 2: Convolutional -> ReLU -> MaxPooling**
    *   `Convolutional(input_shape=(14, 14, 6), num_filters=16, kernel_size=(5, 5), padding='valid')`: Applies 16 different 5x5 filters to the feature maps from the previous layer. `'valid'` padding means no padding is applied.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   `MaxPooling(pool_size=(2, 2), stride=(2, 2))`: Downsamples the 10x10 feature maps to 5x5.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(5, 5, 16)`

4.  **Layer 3: Flatten**
    *   `Flatten()`: Converts the 3D feature maps `(5, 5, 16)` into a 1D vector.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(400,)` (since 5 * 5 * 16 = 400)

5.  **Layer 4: Dense -> ReLU**
    *   `Dense(400, 120)`: A fully connected layer that maps the 400 features to 120 features.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(120,)`

6.  **Layer 5: Dense -> ReLU**
    *   `Dense(120, 84)`: Another fully connected layer, reducing the features from 120 to 84.
    *   `ReLU()`: Introduces non-linearity.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(84,)`

7.  **Layer 6: Output Layer (Dense -> Softmax)**
    *   `Dense(84, 10)`: The final fully connected layer, which produces 10 output values (one for each digit class).
    *   `Softmax()`: Converts the 10 raw output values into a probability distribution, where each value represents the predicted probability for a digit from 0 to 9.
    *   *Output Shape:* `(10,)`

## How to Run

To run the entire training and evaluation process, execute the following command from your project's root directory:

```bash
python train_mnist.py
```

The script will print the training loss for each epoch and, upon completion, will display the final test accuracy.

## Key Concepts in this Script

*   **Convolutional Layer:** The core building block of a CNN. It uses a set of learnable filters (or kernels) to detect features like edges, corners, and textures in an image.
*   **ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit):** A simple yet powerful activation function that introduces non-linearity by outputting the input directly if it is positive, and zero otherwise. This helps the network learn more complex patterns.
*   **MaxPooling Layer:** A down-sampling technique that reduces the spatial dimensions of the feature maps. It works by taking the maximum value over a window of the input, which helps to make the learned features more robust to small translations in the input image.
*   **Flatten Layer:** A utility layer that reshapes a multi-dimensional tensor into a 1D vector. This is a necessary step to transition from the convolutional/pooling layers to the fully connected dense layers.
*   **Dense Layer:** A standard fully connected neural network layer where each input neuron is connected to each output neuron. These layers are typically used in the final stages of a CNN to perform classification based on the features extracted by the convolutional layers.
*   **Softmax Layer:** An activation function used in the output layer for multi-class classification. It converts the raw output scores (logits) from the final dense layer into a probability distribution over the classes, where all probabilities sum to 1.
*   **Categorical Cross-Entropy Loss:** The loss function used for multi-class classification. It measures the difference between the predicted probability distribution (from the Softmax layer) and the true distribution (the one-hot encoded label).

\n## Training Hyperparameters and Initialization\n\n### Number of Epochs (10)\n\nAn **epoch** represents one full pass over the entire training dataset. The model iteratively learns from the data, adjusts its parameters, and then repeats the process for a specified number of epochs.\n\n*   **Chosen Value:** In `train_mnist.py`, the model is currently configured to train for `10` epochs.\n*   **Rationale:** This number was chosen as a practical starting point for several reasons:\n    *   **Educational Purpose:** For a from-scratch implementation running on a CPU, `10` epochs allow the network to demonstrate clear learning convergence without requiring an excessively long training time, especially when using the full MNIST dataset. Longer training times could hinder iterative development and experimentation.\n    *   **Subset Training:** When training on the reduced dataset (e.g., 1000 samples), 10 epochs are often sufficient to observe significant improvements in loss and accuracy.\n    *   **Avoid Overfitting (Initial Stage):** While more epochs might lead to higher accuracy on the training set, a higher number could also lead to overfitting, especially with small datasets or simple models. `10` epochs provide a reasonable balance to learn general features without memorizing the training data.\n\n### Learning Rate (0.01)\n\nThe **learning rate** is a hyperparameter that determines the step size at each iteration while moving toward a minimum of the loss function. It dictates how quickly or slowly the model adjusts its weights with respect to the gradient of the loss function.\n\n*   **Chosen Value:** The learning rate is set to `0.01` in `train_mnist.py`.\n*   **Rationale:** `0.01` is a commonly used default starting value in many deep learning tasks and optimization algorithms. Its selection is based on practical heuristics:\n    *   **Balance:** It's often a good compromise between making rapid progress (higher learning rate) and ensuring stability (lower learning rate).\n    *   **Too High:** A learning rate that is too high can cause the optimization process to overshoot the optimal weights, oscillate, or even diverge, leading to an unstable or non-convergent training.\n    *   **Too Low:** Conversely, a learning rate that is too low will make the training process very slow, requiring many more epochs to converge, potentially getting stuck in local minima.\n*   **Dynamic Adjustment:** In more advanced scenarios, the learning rate can be dynamically adjusted during training (e.g., learning rate schedules, adaptive optimizers like Adam or RMSprop) to achieve better convergence and performance. For this foundational implementation, a fixed rate provides simplicity.\n\n### Parameter Initialization\n\nParameter initialization refers to the process of setting the initial values of the weights ($\mathbf{W}$) and biases ($\mathbf{b}$) for all layers in the neural network before training begins.\n\n*   **Technique Used:** In our `Convolutional` and `Dense` layers, weights are typically initialized from a **random normal distribution** with a small standard deviation, and biases are initialized to **zeros**.\n*   **Rationale:**\n    *   **Breaking Symmetry (Weights):** If all weights were initialized to the same value (e.g., all zeros), every neuron in a layer would learn the exact same features during training. This symmetry would prevent the network from learning diverse and meaningful representations. Random initialization ensures that each neuron starts in a unique state, allowing them to differentiate and specialize.\n    *   **Preventing Vanishing/Exploding Gradients (Weights):** Initializing weights with appropriate scaling helps to prevent the gradients from becoming extremely small (vanishing) or extremely large (exploding) as they propagate backward through the network. While a simple random normal distribution is used here for simplicity, more sophisticated methods like Xavier/Glorot or He initialization (which scale random initializations based on the number of input/output neurons) are often used in practice to maintain healthy gradient flow, especially in deep networks.\n    *   **Zero Biases:** Initializing biases to zero is a common practice and generally doesn't suffer from the symmetry problem that zero weights would. Biases serve to shift the activation function, and starting from zero allows the weights to primarily drive the initial learning process.

## Checkpointing (Pausing and Resuming Training)

For long training runs, it's crucial to be able to save the model's progress and resume training later. Our `Network` class supports this through checkpointing:

*   **Saving Checkpoints:** During training, after each epoch, the model's current weights and biases are saved to a `.npz` file in the `models/checkpoints/` directory. Each checkpoint file is named to include the epoch number (e.g., `model_epoch_1.npz`).
*   **Resuming Training:** If `resume_from_checkpoint` is set to `True` in the `train` method, the network will automatically look for the latest checkpoint file in the specified `checkpoint_dir`. If found, it loads the parameters from that checkpoint and continues training from the next epoch.

This allows you to interrupt training (e.g., if your computer shuts down or you need to use it for something else) and pick up exactly where you left off, saving valuable training time.

## GPU Usage (CPU-Only Implementation)

It's important to note that this "CNN from Scratch" implementation, built using pure NumPy, runs exclusively on the **CPU (Central Processing Unit)**.

*   **Why CPU-Only?** The primary goal of this project is to understand the fundamental mathematics and algorithms of neural networks by implementing them from scratch. NumPy provides the necessary array manipulation capabilities for this educational purpose.
*   **GPU Acceleration:** Modern deep learning frameworks (like PyTorch, TensorFlow, JAX) achieve significant speedups by leveraging **GPUs (Graphics Processing Units)**. GPUs are highly parallel processors optimized for the matrix multiplications and other numerical computations common in neural networks.
*   **How GPUs Work (Briefly):** To utilize a GPU, the numerical operations would need to be offloaded to a GPU-accelerated library (e.g., NVIDIA's CuPy, which provides a NumPy-like interface for GPUs) or a full deep learning framework. This involves managing memory on the GPU and using GPU-specific kernels for computations.
*   **Implication for this Project:** While our implementation is functional and educational, it will be considerably slower than a GPU-accelerated version, especially for larger datasets or more complex models. This is an inherent trade-off when building from first principles with CPU-bound libraries.
